Francis Fukuyama is deputy director of the State Departments policy planning staff and former analyst at the 
RAND Corporation. This article is based on a lecture presented at the University of Chicagos John M. Olin 
Center and to Nathan Tarcov and Allan Bloom for their support in this and many earlier endeavours. The 
opinions expresses in this article do not reflect those of the RAND Corporation or of any agency of the U.S. 
government. 
In watching the flow of events over the past decade or so, it is hard to avoid the feeling that something 
very fundamental has happened in world history. The past year has seen a flood of articles 
commemorating the end of the Cold War, and the fact that peace seems to be breaking out in many 
regions of the world. Most of these analyses lack any larger conceptual framework for distinguishing 
between what is essential and what is contingent or accidental in world history, and are predictably 
superficial. If Mr. Gorbachev were ousted from the Kremlin or a new Ayatollah proclaimed the 
millennium for a desolate Middle Eastern capital, these same commentators would scramble to 
announce the rebirth of a new era of conflict.
And yet, all of these people sense dimly that there is some larger process at work, a process that gives 
coherence and order to the daily headlines. the twentieth century saw the developed world descend into a 
paroxysm of ideological violence, as liberalism contended first with the remnants of absolutism, then 
bolshevism and fascism, and finally an updated Marxism that threatened to lead to the ultimate 
apocalypse of nuclear war. But the century that began full of self-confidence in the ultimate triumph of 
Western liberal democracy seems at its close to be returning full circle to where it started no to an end 
of ideology or a convergence between capitalism and socialism, as earlier predicted, but to an 
unabashed victory of economic and political liberalism.
The triumph of the West, of the Western idea, is evident first of all in the total exhaustion of viable 
systematic alternatives to Western liberalism. In the past decade, there have been unmistakable changes 
in the intellectual climate of the world's tow largest communist countries, and the beginnings of 
significant reform movements in both. But this phenomenon extends beyond high politics and it can be 
seen also in the ineluctable spread of consumerist Western culture in such diverse contexts as the 
peasants' markets and color television sets now omnipresent throughout China, the cooperative 
restaurants and clothing stores opened in the past year in Moscow, the Beethoven piped into Japanese 
department stores, and the rock music enjoyed alike in Prague, Rangoon, and Tehran.
What we may be witnessing in not just the end of the Cold War, or the passing of a particular period of 
post-war history, but the end of history as such: that is, the end point of mankind's ideological evolution 
and the universalization of Western liberal democracy as the final form of human government. This is 
not to say that there will no longer be events to fill the pages of Foreign Affairs's yearly summaries of 
international relations, for the victory of liberalism has occurred primarily in the realm of ideas or 
consciousness and is as yet incomplete in the real or material world. But there are powerful reasons
The notion of the end of history is not an original one. Its best known propagator was Karl Marx, who 
believed that the direction of historical development was a purposeful one determined by the interplay 
of material forces, and would come to an end only with the achievement of a communist utopia that 
would finally resolve all prior contradictions. But the concept of history as a dialectical process with a 
beginning, a middle, and an end was borrowed by Marx from his great German predecessor Georg 
Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel. 
For better or worse, much of Hegel's historicism has become part of our contemporary intellectual 
baggage. The notion that mankind has progresses through a series of primitive stages of consciousness 
on his path to the present, and that these stages corresponded to concrete forms of social organization, 
such as tribal, slave owning, theocratic, and finally democratic egalitarian societies, has become 
inseparable form the modern understanding of man. Hegel was the first philosopher to speak the 
language of modern social science, insofar as man for him was the product of his concrete historical and 
social environment and not, as earlier natural right theorists would have it, a collection of more or less 
fixed natual attributes. The mastery and transformation of man's natural environment through the 
application of science and technology was originally not a Marxist concept, but a Hegelian one. Unlike 
later historicists whose historical relativism degenerated into relativism tout court, however, Hegel 
believed that history culminated in an absolute moment  a moment in which a final, rational form of 
society and state became victorious
It is Hegels misfortune to be known now primarily as Marx's precursor, and it is our misfortune that few 
of us are familiar with Hegel's work from direct study, but only as it has been filtered through the 
distorting lens of Marxism. In France, however, there has been an effort to save Hegel from his Marxist 
interpreters and to resurrect him as the philosopher who most correctly speaks to our time. Among those 
modern French interpreters of Hegel, the greatest was certainly Alexandre Kojeve, a brilliant Russian 
emigre who taught a highly influential series of seminars in Paris in the 1930's at the Ecole Practique 
des Hautes Etudes.1 While largely unknown in the United States, Kojeve had a major impact on the 
intellectual life of the continent. Among his students ranged such future luminaries as Jean-Paul Sartre 
on the Left and Raymond Aron on the Right; post war existentialism borrowed many of its basic 
categories from Hegel via Kojeve. 
Kojeve sought to resurrect the Hegel of the Phenomenology of Mind, the Hegel who proclaimed history 
to be at an end in 1806. For as early as this Hegel saw in Napoleon's defeat of the Prussian monarchy at 
the Battle of Jena the victory of the ideals of the French Revolution, and the imminent universalization 
of the state incorporating the principles of liberty and equality. Kojeve, far from rejecting Hegel in light 
of the turbulent events of the next century and a half, insisted that the latter had been essentially correct.2 
The Battle of Jena marked the end of history because it was at that point that the vanguard of humanity
It is Hegel's misfortune to be known now primarily as Marx's precursor, and it is our misfortune that few 
of us are familiar with Hegel's work from direct study, but only as it has been filtered through the 
distorting lens of Marxism. In France, however, there has been an effort to save Hegel from his Marxist 
interpreters and to resurrect him as the philosopher who most correctly speaks to our time. Among those 
modern French interpreters of Hegel, the greatest was certainly Alexandre Kojeve, a brilliant Russian 
emigre who taught a highly influential series of seminars in Paris in the 1930's at the Ecole Practique 
des Hautes Etudes.1 While largely unknown in the United States, Kojeve had a major impact on the 
intellectual life of the continent. Among his students ranged such future luminaries as Jean-Paul Sartre 
on the Left and Raymond Aron on the Right; post war existentialism borrowed many of its basic 
categories from Hegel via Kojeve. 
Kojeve sought to resurrect the Hegel of the Phenomenology of Mind, the Hegel who proclaimed history 
to be at an end in 1806. For as early as this Hegel saw in Napoleon's defeat of the Prussian monarchy at 
the Battle of Jena the victory of the ideals of the French Revolution, and the imminent universalization 
of the state incorporating the principles of liberty and equality. Kojeve, far from rejecting Hegel in light 
of the turbulent events of the next century and a half, insisted that the latter had been essentially correct.2 
The Battle of Jena marked the end of history because it was at that point that the vanguard of humanity
It is Hegel's misfortune to be known now primarily as Marx's precursor, and it is our misfortune that few 
of us are familiar with Hegel's work from direct study, but only as it has been filtered through the 
distorting lens of Marxism. In France, however, there has been an effort to save Hegel from his Marxist 
interpreters and to resurrect him as the philosopher who most correctly speaks to our time. Among those 
modern French interpreters of Hegel, the greatest was certainly Alexandre Kojeve, a brilliant Russian 
emigre who taught a highly influential series of seminars in Paris in the 1930's at the Ecole Practique 
des Hautes Etudes.1 While largely unknown in the United States, Kojeve had a major impact on the 
intellectual life of the continent. Among his students ranged such future luminaries as Jean-Paul Sartre 
on the Left and Raymond Aron on the Right; post war existentialism borrowed many of its basic 
categories from Hegel via Kojeve. 
Kojeve sought to resurrect the Hegel of the Phenomenology of Mind, the Hegel who proclaimed history 
to be at an end in 1806. For as early as this Hegel saw in Napoleon's defeat of the Prussian monarchy at 
the Battle of Jena the victory of the ideals of the French Revolution, and the imminent universalization 
of the state incorporating the principles of liberty and equality. Kojeve, far from rejecting Hegel in light 
of the turbulent events of the next century and a half, insisted that the latter had been essentially correct.2 
The Battle of Jena marked the end of history because it was at that point that the vanguard of humanity
over income, or of the militaristic life of the Spartan hoplite over the wealth of the Athenian trader, or 
even the ascetic life of the early capitalist entrepreneur over that of a traditional leisured aristocrat, 
cannot possibly be explained by the impersonal working of material forces, but come preeminently out 
of the sphere of consciousness -- what we have labeled here broadly as ideology. And indeed, a central 
theme of Weber's work was to prove that contrary to Marx, the material mode of production, far from 
being the "base", was itself a "superstructure" with roots in religion and culture, and that to understand 
the emergence of modern capitalism and the profit motive one had to study their antecedents in the 
realm of the spirit. 
As we look around the contemporary world, the poverty of materialist theories of economic 
development is all too apparent. The Wall Street Journal school of deterministic materialism habitually 
points to the stunning economic success of Asia in the past few decades as evidence of the viability of 
free market economics, with the implication that all societies would see similar development were they 
simply to allow their populations to pursue their material self-interest freely. Surely free markets and 
stable political systems are a necessary precondition to capitalist economic growth. But just as surely the 
cultural heritage of those Far Eastern societies, the ethic of work and saving and family, a religious 
heritage that does not, like Islam, place restrictions on certain forms of economic behavior, and other 
deeply ingrained moral qualities, are equally important in explaining their economic performace.7 And 
yet the intellectual weight of materialism is such that not a single respectable contemporary theory of 
economic development addresses consciousness and culture seriously as the matrix within which 
economic behavior is formed. 
Failure to understand that the roots of economic behavior lie in the realm of consciousness and culture 
leads to the common mistake of attributing material causes to phenomena that are essentially ideal in 
nature. For example, it is commonplace in the West to interpret the reform movements first in China and 
most recently in the Soviet Union as the victory of the material over the ideal -- that is, a recognition that 
ideological incentives could not replace material ones in stimulation a highly productive modern 
economy, and that if one wanted to prosper one had to appeal to baser forms of self-interest. But the 
deep defects of socialist economies were evident thirty or forty years ago to anyone who chose to look. 
Why was it that these countries moved away from central palnning in the 1980's? The answer must be 
found in the consciousness of the elites and leaders ruling them, who decided to opt for the "Protestan
had in fact ended, the homogenous state would eventually become victorious throughtout the material 
world. 
I have neither the space nor, frankly, the ability to defend in depth Hegel's radical idealist perspective. 
The issue is not whether Hegel's system was right, but whether his perspective might uncover the 
problematic nature of many materialist explanations we often take for granted. This is not to deny the 
role of material factors as such. To a literal minded idealist, human society can be built around any 
arbitrary set of principle regardless of their relationship to the material world. And in fact men have 
proven themselves able to endure the most extreme material hardships in the name of ideas that exist in 
the realm of the spirit alone, be it the divinity of cows or the nature of the Holy Trinity.10 
But while man's very perception of the material world is shaped by his historical consciousness of it, the 
material world can clearly affect in return the viability of a particular state of consciousness. In 
particular, the spectacular abundance of advanced liberal economies and the infinitely diverse consumer 
culture made possible by them seem to both foster and preserve liberalism in the political sphere. I want 
to avoid the materialist determinism that says that liberal economics inevitably produces liberal politics, 
because I believe that both economics and politics presuppose an autonomous prior state of 
consciousness that makes them possible. But that state of consciousness that permits the growth of 
liberalism seems to stabilize in the way one would expect at the end of history if it is underwritten by 
the abundance of a modern free market economy. We might summarize the content of the universal 
homogenous state as liberal democracy in the political sphere combined with easy access to VCRs and 
stereos in the economic. 
Have we in fact reached the end of history? Are there, in other words, any fundamental "contradictions" 
in human life that cannot be resolved in the context of modern liberalism, that would be resolvable by an 
alternative political-economic structure? If we accept the idealist premises laid out above, we must seek 
an answer to this question in the realm of ideology and consciousness. Our task is not to answer 
exhaustively the challenges to liberalism promoted by every crackpot messiah around the world, but 
only those that are embodied in important social or political forces and movements, and which are 
therefore part of world history. For our purposes, it matters very little what strange thoughts occur to 
people in Albania or Burkina Faso, for we are interested in what one could in some sense call the 
common ideological heritage of mankind. 
In the past century, there have been two major challenges to liberalism, those of fascism and of 
communism. The former11 saw the political weakness, materialism, anomie, and lack of community of 
the West as fundamental contradictions in liberal societies that could only be resolved by a strong state 
that forged a new "people" on the basis of national excessiveness. Fascism was destroyed as a living 
ideology by World War II. This was a defeat, of course, on a very material level, but it amounted to a 
defeat of the idea as well. What destroyed fascism as an idea was not universal moral revulsion against 
it, since plenty of people were willing to endorse the idea as long as it seemed the wave of the future, but 
file:///G|/Classes/End%20of%20History_files/content_files/Fukuyama_the_end_of_history.htm (6 of 18)6/20/2003 7:04:26 AMThe End of History
its lack of success. After the ear, it seemed to most people that German fascism as well as its other 
European and Asian variants were bound to self-destruct. There was no material reason why new fascist 
movements could not have sprung up again after the war in other locales, ut for the fact that expansionist 
ultranationalism, with its promise of unending conflict leading ot disastrous military defeat, had 
completely lost its appeal. The ruins of the Reich chancellory as well as the atomic bombs dropped on 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki killed this ideology on the level of consciousness as well as materially, and all 
of the proto-fascist movements spawned by the German and Japanese examples like the Peronist 
movement in Argentina or Subhas Chandra Bose's Indian National Army withered after the war. 
The ideological challenge mounted by the other great alternative to liberalism, communism, was far 
more serious. Marx, speaking Hegel's language, asserted that liberal society contained fundamental 
contradiction that could not be resolved within its context, that between capital and labor, and this 
contradiction has constituted the chief accusation against liberalism ever since. But surely, the class 
issue has actually been successfully resolved in the West. As Kojeve (among others) noted, the 
egalitarianism of modern America represents the essential achievement of the classless society 
envisioned by Marx. This is not to say that there are not rich people and poor people in the United 
States, or that the gap between them has not grown in recent years. But the root causes of economic 
inequality do not have to do with the underlying legal and social structure of our society, which remains 
fundamentally egalitarian and moderately redistributionist, so much as with the cultural and social 
characteristics of the groups that make it up, which are in turn the historical legacy of premodern 
conditions. Thus black poverty in the United States is not the inherent product of liberalism, but is rather 
the "legacy of slavery and racism" which persisted long after the formal abolition of slavery. 
As a result of the receding of the class issue, the appeal of communism in the developed Western world, 
it is safe to say, is lower today than any time since the end of the First World War. This can be measured 
in any number of ways: in the declining membership and electoral pull of the major European 
communist parties, and their overtly revisionist programs; in the corresponding electoral success of 
conservative parties form Britain and Germany to the United States and Japan which are unabashedly 
pro-market and antistatist; and in an intellectual climate whose most "advanced" members no longer 
believe that bourgeois society is something that ultimately needs to be overcome. This is to say that the 
opinions of progressive intellectuals in Western countries are not deeply pathological in any number of 
ways. But those who believe that the future must inevitably be socialist tend to be very old, or very 
marginal to the real political discourse of their societies. 
One may argue that the socialist alternative was never terribly plausible for the North Atlantic world, 
and was sustained for the last several decades primarily by its success outside of this region. But it is 
precisely in the non-European world that one is not struck by the occurrence of major ideological 
transformations. Surely the most remarkable changes have occurred in Asia. Due to the strength and 
adaptabi that Soviet socialism was not superior to the West in any respect but was in fact a monumental failure. 
The conservative opposition in the USSR, consisting both of simple workers afraid of unemployment 
and inflation and of party officials fearful of losing their jobs and privileges, is outspoken and may be 
strong enough to force Gorbachev's ouster in the next few years. But what both groups desire is 
tradition, order, and authority; they manifest no deep commitment to Marxism-Leninism, except insofar 
as they have invested much of their own lives in it. 14 For authority to be restored in the Soviet Union 
after Gorbachev's demolition work, it must be on the basis of some new and vigorous ideology which 
has not yet appeared on the horizon. 
If we admit for the moment that the fascist and communist challenges to liberalism are dead, are there 
any other ideological competitors left? Or put another way, are there contradictions in liberal society 
beyond that of class that are n The Soviet Union could in no way be described as a liberal or democratic country now, nor do I think 
that it is terribly likely that perestroika will succeed such that the label will be thinkable any time in the 
near future. But at the end of history it is not necessary that all societies become successful liberal 
societies, merely that they end their ideological pretensions of representing different and higher forms 
of human society. And in this respect I believe that something very important has happened in the Soviet 
Union in the past few years: the criticisms of the Soviet system sanctioned by Borbachev have been so 
thorough and devastating that there is very little chance of going back to either Stalinism or 
Brezhnevism, in any simple way. Gorbachev has finally permitted people to say what they had privately 
understood for many years, namely, that the magical incantation of Marxism-Leninism were nonsense, 
that Soviet socialism was not superior to the West in any respect but was in fact a monumental failure. 
The conservative opposition in the USSR, consisting both of simple workers afraid of unemployment 
and inflation and of party officials fearful of losing their jobs and privileges, is outspoken and may be 
strong enough to force Gorbachev's ouster in the next few years. But what both groups desire is 
tradition, order, and authority; they manifest no deep commitment to Marxism-Leninism, except insofar 
as they have invested much of their own lives in it. 14 For authority to be restored in the Soviet Union 
after Gorbachev's demolition work, it must be on the basis of some new and vigorous ideology which 
has not yet appeared on the horizon. 
If we admit for the moment that the fascist and communist challenges to liberalism are dead, are there 
any other ideological competitors left? Or put another way, are there contradictions in liberal society 
beyond that of class that are n What are the implications of the end of history for international relations? Clearly, the vast bulk of the 
Third World remains very much mired in history, and will be a terrain of conflict for many years to 
come. But let us focus for the time being on the larger and more developed states of the world who after 
all account for the greater part of world politics. russia and China are not likely to join the developed 
nations of the West as liberal societies any time in the foreseeable future, but suppose for a moment that 
Marxism-Leninism ceases to be a factor driving the foreign policies of these states -- a prospect which, 
if not yet here, the last few years have made a real possibility. How will the overall characteristics of a 
de-ideologized world differ from those of the one with which we are familiar at such a hypothetical 
juncture? 
The most common answer is -- not very much. For there is a very widespread belief among many 
observers of international relations that underneath the skin of ideology is a hard core of great power 
national interest that guarantees a fairly high level of competition and conflict between nations. Indeed, 
according to one academically popular school of international relations theory, system as such, and to 
understand the prospects for conflict one must look at he shape of the system -- for example, whether it 
is bipolar or multipolar -- rather than at the specific character of the nations and regimes that constitute 
it. This school in effect applies a Hobbesian view of politics to international relations, and assumes that 
aggression and insecurity are universal characteristics of human societies ratBelievers in this line of thought take the relations that existed between the participants in the classical 
nineteenth century European balance of power as a model for what a deideologized contemporary world 
would look lie. Charles Krauthammer, for example, recently explained that if as a result of Gorbachev's 
reforms the USSR is shorn of Marxist-Leninist ideology, its behavior will revert to that of nineteenth 
century imperial Russia.16 While he finds this more reassuring that the threat posed by a communist 
Russia, he implies that here will still be a substantial degree of competition and conflict in the 
international system, just as there was say between Russia and Britain or Wilhelmine Germany in the 
last century. This is, or course, a convenient point of view for people who want to admit that something 
major is changing in the Soviet Union, but do not want to accept responsibility for recommending the 
radical policy redirection implicit in such a view. But is it true? 
In fact, the notion that ideology is a superstructure imposed on a substratum of permanent great power 
interest is a highly questionable proposition. For the way in which any state defines its national interest 
is not universal but rests on some kind of prior ideological basis, just as we saw that economic behavior 
is determined by a prior state of consciousness. In this century, states have adopted highly articulated 
doctrines with explicit foreign policy agendas legitimizing expansionism, like Marxism-Leninism or 
National Socialism. 
The expansionist and competitive behavior of nineteenth century Europeans states rested on no less ideal 
a basis; it just so happened that the ideology driving it was less explicit than the doctrines of the 
twentieth century. For one thing, most "liberal" European societies were illiberal insofar as they believed 
in the legitimacy of imperialism, that is, the right of one nation to rule over other nations without regard 
for the wishes of the ruled. The justifications for imperialism varied from nation to nation, from a crude 
belief in the legitimacy of force, particularly when applied to non-Europeans, to the White Man's Burden 
and Europe's Christianizing mission, to the desire to give people of color access to the culture of 
Rabelais and Moliere. But whatever the particular ideological basis, every "developed" country believed recent evolutionary history, by the late 1960s some molecular biologists were pushing further toward the base of the tree of life by studying highly conserved nucleic acid sequences. Carl Woese, a molecular biologist whose earlier work was on the genetic code and its origin, began using small subunit ribosomal RNA to reclassify bacteria by genetic (rather than morphological) similarity. Work proceeded slowly at first, but accelerated as new sequencing methods were developed in the 1970s and 1980s. By 1977, Woese and George Fox announced that some bacteria, such as methanogens, lacked the rRNA units that Woese's phylogenetic studies were based on; they argued that these organisms were actually distinct enough from conventional bacteria and the so-called higher organisms to form their own kingdom, which they called archaebacteria. Though controversial at first (and challenged again in the late 1990s), Woese's work became the basis of the modern three-domain system of Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya (replacing the five domain system that had emerged in the 1960s)
Alcohol is useless against the heat of a hot pepper. Chasing hot food with alcohol will magnify the burn because the capsaicin will dissolve in the alcohol, but won't be neutralized by it. You'll spread the burn around. The exception here would be if you've had enough alcohol to dull pain reception.
Drink Acid
Alcohol is useless against the heat of a hot pepper. Chasing hot food with alcohol will magnify the burn because the capsaicin will dissolve in the alcohol, but won't be neutralized by it. You'll spread the burn around.
One need look no further than the recent performance of Vietnamese immigrants in he U.S. school 
system when compared to their black of Hispanic classmates to realize that culture and consciousness 
are absolutely crucial to explain not only economic behavior but virtually every other important aspect 
of life as well. 
8 I understand that a fullexplanation of the origins of the reform movements in China and Russia is a 
good deal more complicated than this simple formula would suggest. The Soviet reform, for example, 
was motivated in good measure by Moscow's sense of insecurity in the WAtechnological military realm, 
Nonetheless, neither country ion the eve of its reforms was in such a state of material crisis that one 
could have predicted the surprising reform paths ultimately taken. 
9 It is still not clear whether the Soviet people are as "Protestant" as Gorbachev and will follow him 
down that path. 
10 The internal politics of the Byzantine Empire at the time of Justinian revolved around a conflict 
between the so-called monophysites and monotheist, who believed that the unity of the Holy Trinity was 
alternatively one of nature or of will. This conflict corresponded to some extent to one between 
proponents of different racing teams in the Hippodrome in Byzantium and led to a not insignificant level 
of political violenceMolecular systematics has been made possible by the availability of techniques for DNA sequencing, which allow the determination of the exact sequence of nucleotides or bases in either DNA or RNA. At present it is still a long and expensive process to sequence the entire genome of an organism, and this has been done for only a few species. However, it is quite feasible to determine the sequence of a defined area of a particular chromosome. Typical molecular systematic analyses require the sequencing of around 1000 base pairs.
Though not directly related to molecular evolution, the mid-1960s also saw the rise of the gene-centered view of evolution, spurred by George C. Williams's Adaptation and Natural Selection (1966). Debate over units of selection, particularly the controversy over group selection, led to increased focus on individual genes (rather than whole organisms or populations) as the theoretical basis for evolution. However, the increased focus on genes did not mean a focus on molecular evolution; in fact, the adaptationism promoted by Williams and other evolutionary theories further marginalized the apparently non-adaptive changes studied by molecular evolutionists.
The critical responses to the neutral theory that soon appeared marked the beginning of the neutralist selectionist debate. In short, selectionists viewed natural selection as the primary or only cause of evolution, even at the molecular level, while neutralists held that neutral mutations were widespread and that genetic drift was a crucial factor in the evolution of proteins. Kimura became the most prominent defender of the neutral theory which would be his main focus for the rest of his career. With Ohta, he refocused his arguments on the rate at which drift could fix new mutations in finite populations, the significance of constant protein evolution rates, and the functional constraints on protein evolution that biochemists and molecular biologists had described. Though Kimura had initially developed the neutral theory partly as an outgrowth of the classical position within the classical/balance controversy (predicting high genetic load as a consequence of non-neutral mutations), he gradually deemphasized his original argument that segregational load would be impossibly high without neutral mutations (which many selectionists, and even fellow neutralists King and Jukes, rejected)
While early work in molecular evolution focused on readily sequenced proteins and relatively recent evolutionary history, by the late 1960s some molecular biologists were pushing further toward the base of the tree of life by studying highly conserved nucleic acid sequences. Carl Woese, a molecular biologist whose earlier work was on the genetic code and its origin, began using small subunit ribosomal RNA to reclassify bacteria by genetic (rather than morphological) similarity. Work proceeded slowly at first, but accelerated as new sequencing methods were developed in the 1970s and 1980s. By 1977, Woese and George Fox announced that some bacteria, such as methanogens, lacked the rRNA units that Woese's phylogenetic studies were based on; they argued that these organisms were actually distinct enough from conventional bacteria and the so-called higher organisms to form their own kingdom, which they called archaebacteria. Though controversial at first (and challenged again in the late 1990s), Woese's work became the basis of the modern three-domain system of Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya (replacing the five domain system that had emerged in the 1960s)