Francis Fukuyama is deputy director of the State Departments policy planning staff and former analyst at the 
RAND Corporation. This article is based on a lecture presented at the University of Chicagos John M. Olin 
Center and to Nathan Tarcov and Allan Bloom for their support in this and many earlier endeavours. The 
opinions expresses in this article do not reflect those of the RAND Corporation or of any agency of the U.S. 
government. 
In watching the flow of events over the past decade or so, it is hard to avoid the feeling that something 
very fundamental has happened in world history. The past year has seen a flood of articles 
commemorating the end of the Cold War, and the fact that peace seems to be breaking out in many 
regions of the world. Most of these analyses lack any larger conceptual framework for distinguishing 
between what is essential and what is contingent or accidental in world history, and are predictably 
superficial. If Mr. Gorbachev were ousted from the Kremlin or a new Ayatollah proclaimed the 
millennium for a desolate Middle Eastern capital, these same commentators would scramble to 
announce the rebirth of a new era of conflict.
And yet, all of these people sense dimly that there is some larger process at work, a process that gives 
coherence and order to the daily headlines. the twentieth century saw the developed world descend into a 
paroxysm of ideological violence, as liberalism contended first with the remnants of absolutism, then 
bolshevism and fascism, and finally an updated Marxism that threatened to lead to the ultimate 
apocalypse of nuclear war. But the century that began full of self-confidence in the ultimate triumph of 
Western liberal democracy seems at its close to be returning full circle to where it started no to an end 
of ideology or a convergence between capitalism and socialism, as earlier predicted, but to an 
unabashed victory of economic and political liberalism.
The triumph of the West, of the Western idea, is evident first of all in the total exhaustion of viable 
systematic alternatives to Western liberalism. In the past decade, there have been unmistakable changes 
in the intellectual climate of the world's tow largest communist countries, and the beginnings of 
significant reform movements in both. But this phenomenon extends beyond high politics and it can be 
seen also in the ineluctable spread of consumerist Western culture in such diverse contexts as the 
peasants' markets and color television sets now omnipresent throughout China, the cooperative 
restaurants and clothing stores opened in the past year in Moscow, the Beethoven piped into Japanese 
department stores, and the rock music enjoyed alike in Prague, Rangoon, and Tehran.
What we may be witnessing in not just the end of the Cold War, or the passing of a particular period of 
post-war history, but the end of history as such: that is, the end point of mankind's ideological evolution 
and the universalization of Western liberal democracy as the final form of human government. This is 
not to say that there will no longer be events to fill the pages of Foreign Affairs's yearly summaries of 
international relations, for the victory of liberalism has occurred primarily in the realm of ideas or 
consciousness and is as yet incomplete in the real or material world. But there are powerful reasons
The notion of the end of history is not an original one. Its best known propagator was Karl Marx, who 
believed that the direction of historical development was a purposeful one determined by the interplay 
of material forces, and would come to an end only with the achievement of a communist utopia that 
would finally resolve all prior contradictions. But the concept of history as a dialectical process with a 
beginning, a middle, and an end was borrowed by Marx from his great German predecessor Georg 
Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel. 
For better or worse, much of Hegel's historicism has become part of our contemporary intellectual 
baggage. The notion that mankind has progresses through a series of primitive stages of consciousness 
on his path to the present, and that these stages corresponded to concrete forms of social organization, 
such as tribal, slave owning, theocratic, and finally democratic egalitarian societies, has become 
inseparable form the modern understanding of man. Hegel was the first philosopher to speak the 
language of modern social science, insofar as man for him was the product of his concrete historical and 
social environment and not, as earlier natural right theorists would have it, a collection of more or less 
fixed natual attributes. The mastery and transformation of man's natural environment through the 
application of science and technology was originally not a Marxist concept, but a Hegelian one. Unlike 
later historicists whose historical relativism degenerated into relativism tout court, however, Hegel 
believed that history culminated in an absolute moment  a moment in which a final, rational form of 
society and state became victorious
It is Hegels misfortune to be known now primarily as Marx's precursor, and it is our misfortune that few 
of us are familiar with Hegel's work from direct study, but only as it has been filtered through the 
distorting lens of Marxism. In France, however, there has been an effort to save Hegel from his Marxist 
interpreters and to resurrect him as the philosopher who most correctly speaks to our time. Among those 
modern French interpreters of Hegel, the greatest was certainly Alexandre Kojeve, a brilliant Russian 
emigre who taught a highly influential series of seminars in Paris in the 1930's at the Ecole Practique 
des Hautes Etudes.1 While largely unknown in the United States, Kojeve had a major impact on the 
intellectual life of the continent. Among his students ranged such future luminaries as Jean-Paul Sartre 
on the Left and Raymond Aron on the Right; post war existentialism borrowed many of its basic 
categories from Hegel via Kojeve. 
Kojeve sought to resurrect the Hegel of the Phenomenology of Mind, the Hegel who proclaimed history 
to be at an end in 1806. For as early as this Hegel saw in Napoleon's defeat of the Prussian monarchy at 
the Battle of Jena the victory of the ideals of the French Revolution, and the imminent universalization 
of the state incorporating the principles of liberty and equality. Kojeve, far from rejecting Hegel in light 
of the turbulent events of the next century and a half, insisted that the latter had been essentially correct.2 
The Battle of Jena marked the end of history because it was at that point that the vanguard of humanity
It is Hegel's misfortune to be known now primarily as Marx's precursor, and it is our misfortune that few 
of us are familiar with Hegel's work from direct study, but only as it has been filtered through the 
distorting lens of Marxism. In France, however, there has been an effort to save Hegel from his Marxist 
interpreters and to resurrect him as the philosopher who most correctly speaks to our time. Among those 
modern French interpreters of Hegel, the greatest was certainly Alexandre Kojeve, a brilliant Russian 
emigre who taught a highly influential series of seminars in Paris in the 1930's at the Ecole Practique 
des Hautes Etudes.1 While largely unknown in the United States, Kojeve had a major impact on the 
intellectual life of the continent. Among his students ranged such future luminaries as Jean-Paul Sartre 
on the Left and Raymond Aron on the Right; post war existentialism borrowed many of its basic 
categories from Hegel via Kojeve. 
Kojeve sought to resurrect the Hegel of the Phenomenology of Mind, the Hegel who proclaimed history 
to be at an end in 1806. For as early as this Hegel saw in Napoleon's defeat of the Prussian monarchy at 
the Battle of Jena the victory of the ideals of the French Revolution, and the imminent universalization 
of the state incorporating the principles of liberty and equality. Kojeve, far from rejecting Hegel in light 
of the turbulent events of the next century and a half, insisted that the latter had been essentially correct.2 
utes Etudes.1 While largely unknown in the United States, Kojeve had a major impact on the 

